Hello everyone and welcome to the dates and time stamps lecture in this lecture we're going to be discussing
how to work with dates and time stamp information with SPARK data frames.
Now there's actually a lot of functions and options that are available to you here.
So we're also going to go ahead and explore the documentation a little bit and shoot the most common
operations to perform on a working date and time data.
Let's go ahead and jump to the text editor to get started.
All right.
Here I am at the text editor.
A quick note.
The files we're going to be using are the dates and time stamps that Skala script.
This says all the notes that we're going to be going over this lecture.
And if you also notice that we're going to be reading the Citigroup 2006 2008 data again.
So if you remember from one of the previous lectures the Citigroup data its stock information.
And one of the columns in this state of frame was the date of that particular stock closing price high
price et cetera.
So that's the column we're going to be working with when dealing with this data in this lecture.
Go ahead and copy and paste the first three code lines so starting the spark session importing it and
then going ahead and reading that Citigroup data let's print the schema just so we can remember what
this actually looks like you're going to save this and upload this.
Let's see that Skala script that I'm running in again here we can see that we have a time stamp object
for the date.
And then we have open high low close and volume prices.
So this is the column we're going to be working with.
Now there's a ton of options as far as working with time and date information.
If you go ahead and go to the dates and time stamp thought Skala script you'll see that there's a long
Eurail here.
This is just another link to the actual functions page that we've seen before.
So you've seen this already in other lectures.
Will we go ahead and copy this.
I'm going to jump to that real quick so we can explore it just a little bit so we can get a sense of
all the options available to us.
We're going to go ahead and jump to my browser now
OK.
So here I am at the object functions page that we've seen before.
These are all the functions that are available for a data frame and if you scroll down you should see
eventually past the aggregate function and the collection functions the date time functions.
So these are all the functions that are available to you that you can perform date time operations on
any particular date or time stamp column.
So for instance you can extract the day of the year so you can use this day of year function you pass
in the column and it extracts the day of the year as an integer from a given date slash time stamp slash
string.
OK.
So you can see there's lots of things you can extract so minutes months get months between the quarter.
So whether in the first quarter second quarter that sort of financial information you can see there's
there's some experimental window operations and these luckily have quite a bit more documentation to
them but hopefully we can see that you have a lot of options here when dealing with dates and times
that information we're going to go ahead and walk you through and the very basics of dealing with these
sort of date time functions.
And then you can comeback that this specific you are Airlink when you're dealing with your own data
and need to work for your own time stamp data.
Let's go ahead and jump back to the tech sector to explore a couple of these functions.
All right.
Here I am back at the text editor.
Let me go ahead and just show you how you can use any of these sort of time stamp functions that we
saw earlier.
So couple of the most useful ones are going to be kind of selecting you know the month or the year or
the dates etc..
So we can see if we go ahead and just print out the bath head and print out the first two rows.
You'll notice that we have the whole time stamp information.
In this case we just have the date information since there is no actually specific time here but this
is a time stamp object.
You could have anything from hours to Minutes et cetera.
So let's go ahead and try to select just the month out of this time stamp object.
And the way you do that is you would visit that your L that we just saw look at the function you need
in this case.
It's called month.
And then you pasand the column itself.
In this case it's the dates column and that will return if we go ahead and show this.
Let me run this for us.
That's going to return a column of the month dates.
You notice here all these values say one because all the rows started in January.
So there's only the top 10 heroes you can continue on until we go through the months themselves.
We check out the year instead of the month so we can say year there and run this you'll notice now we
get back the year and all the time stamp information for the very first couple of rows was from 2006.
So let me go ahead and show you a more practical example.
You know usually not just want a singular column data frame with the times the information you want
to use that time stamp affirmation to actually perform some sort of operation.
So let's go ahead and see if we can do this.
Let's try to get the average per year.
So the average stock closing price per year in order to do this are going to go ahead and delete that
going to save Val D-Nev. to.
So that's going to make a new data frame and say thought with column I'm going to name this new column
year and then remember as the second argument we actually pass in the function in this case is that
year function I showed earlier and if you have any to reference what functions are available to you
you can go to that your that we just discussed and then pasand the column itself.
In this case I want to say date and note the difference here I'm passing in the actual column not just
the column name and there we're going to say wow DSF EVGA for averages is equal to DFI to that group
by and I'm going to group by this new year column that I just made and then I'm going to go ahead and
show the mean Methot off of it and then actually I don't want to see all the columns.
I just want to see the closing price.
So let's go and say DSF averages selects and I'm going to use a scarlet notation here just to select
multiple columns to select the year column and the close column.
But what happens is if you'll notice appear you'll see the function name and then the column name.
And in this case when you call mean you're going to end up seeing a Viji and then close.
And this needs to be in string form so keep that in mind if you ever get a result after performing some
sort of operation or function after each group buying or trying to select a lot of time Sparke data
frame's is going to wrap the old column name with whatever the function name you used was.
In this case mine happens to be average but let's say you are doing max or men you would see a max from
in here.
All right.
So let's go ahead and then just show this or run it.
Make sure it all works and we'll break it down for you and show you one more simple example.
OK.
So here we can see the year and then the average closing price for that year.
And you'll notice because the financial crisis from 2006 we have 49 2007 we have for 77 but in 2008
you have a big drop here to 190.
And what you could also do is use order by that we learned about in the group by aggregate functions
to sort this by the year column.
Well let's go ahead and run through this example one more time with the max.
So we go ahead and take our old data frame say with column and then we say year.
So in this case we went ahead and said year is going to be that time stamp function.
Year pass and the column itself not the column name of the column itself.
And I wanted to set that to DFI to then I'm going to grab this new data frame and then I'm going to
group by that year column that I just created above there.
In this case let's go ahead and grab the max so we get the max price for the year not the average price
for the year.
So it's going to be more interesting because of the financial crisis.
Let's go ahead and get the minimum price so just see the floor price for 2006 2007 2008.
And then we're going to set that two averages instead of seeing everything.
I just want to actually grab two columns off of this.
I will say DFI averages instead of averages go in and call this men's and let's go and call this men's
as well.
And this is going to need a change too.
Am I in close.
And let's go in and show this and make sure this all worked to load this up again and explore it.
And now I can see the vast difference in minimum closing prices here.
So you can see in 2006 the lowest price of an entire year as closing was 450 in 2007 the lowest price
for that year in any given day was 292.
But this is incredible.
In 2008 the lowest stock price was $37.
So this really reflects that financial crisis as far as the Citigroup stock which was heavily affected
by that.
OK.
So hopefully you've seen the power of Sparke data frames and how easy it is to use date and time stamp
functions.
Basically what you're going to do is if you ever want to extract some sort of date or time stamp information
from your data you'll go ahead and visit that your URL that I showed earlier apply it using this with
column technique to create a new column with whatever information you want and then you can perform
any sort of operations you want whether it's group by or just an aggregate function that we discussed
earlier.
Okay.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.